Indicator Definitions and Supporting Information

https://fingertips.phe.org.uk/profile/amr-local-indicators/data#page/6/gid/1938132909/pat/46/par/E39000030/ati/154/are/E38000010/iid/92377/age/1/sex/4

Indicator ID92377
Date updated: 02 Oct 2018
Indicator full name: Twelve month rolling total number of prescribed antibiotic items per STAR-PU by Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) within England

Rationale 

In order to fully appreciate antimicrobial prescribing, it is necessary to take into consideration demographic characteristics of the population as it may influence levels of prescribing. For that reason STAR-PU data is adjusted for both age and sex.

STAR-PU is an indirectly standardised ratio that removes confounding effects of age and sex in the comparison of prescribing between different geographical areas. This method allows for more accurate comparison of prescribing. In this specific indicator, a higher value is associated with increased prescribing.
Policy 	The consumption of antibiotics is a major driver for the development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria. AMR is a serious and growing global public health concern with implications for every Government and the populations they serve. The emergence and spread of infections caused by bacteria that are resistant to treatment by current antibiotics strikes at the heart of modern medical and veterinary practice. The use of antibiotics is essential for saving lives in conditions such as sepsis and without effective antibiotics.

AMR is a key public health issue. The government released a 5 year antimicrobial resistance strategy in 2013.  

This indicator is a measure of sustained reduction of inappropriate prescribing in primary care, which forms part of the Quality Premium measure of reducing gram-negative blood stream infections and inappropriate antibiotic prescribing in at risk groups. For more information, please visit the NHS England website.

Definition 

STAR-PU are weighted units to allow comparisons adjusting for the age and sex of patients distribution of each practice. Quarters are by calendar year. The weightings are derived from an anonymised random sample of approximately 800,000 patients registered with about 90 General Practices. They are calculated by extracting and analysing the cost or volume of prescribing by specific age groups and gender.

Data are extracted as a quarterly snapshot in time from the primary care provider payments system maintained by NHS Digital.

Primary care provider data are released in single year of age (SYOA) and 5-year age bands, both of which finish at 95+, split by gender and aggregated (See caveats).
Data source 	

STAR-PU data is downloaded in report form from NHS Business Service Authority (NHS BSA). STAR-PU data is supplied from NHS Digital to NHS BSA as age & sex adjusted prescribing data. For more information, please visit the NHS Digital website.

*Currently reports are showing items data for CCGs merged after April 2018, but missing STAR-PU (practice list sizes) information for the new CCGs. The STAR-PU values are showing against the closed (old) CCGs. NHSBSA are currently investigating the issue and will inform users once a fix has been implemented.
Definition of numerator

Total number of antibiotic items prescribed in practices located within the area. An item is an antibiotic (from British National Formulary Section 5.1) that is prescribed in a primary care setting

A prescription item refers to a single item prescribed by a prescriber on a prescription form (known as an FP10). If a prescription form includes three medicines it is counted as three prescription items. The number of items is a measure of how often a prescriber has decided to write a prescription. It is often used when we wish to look at prescriber behaviour as every prescription is an opportunity to change treatment. For vaccinations and acute treatment (for example, a short course of antibiotics) the item is also a reasonable measure of the number of courses of treatment.

GP practice counts of items are aggregated to CCG
Source of numerator: Antimicrobial prescribing data for STAR-PU is provided by NHS BSA and is originally sourced from NHS Digital.
Definition of denominator: STAR-PU are weighted units to allow comparisons adjusting for the age and sex of patients distribution of each practice. 
Source of denominator: STAR-PU data is supplied from NHS Digital to NHS BSA as age & sex adjusted prescribing data. For more information please visit the NHS Digital website.

The data for the indicator is based on four 3-month rolling figures that are used to generate a rolling 12 month data point. This data is sourced from NHS Digital.
Value type: Indirectly standardised ratio
Methodology: Numerator is divided by the denominator (items divided by STAR-PU).

The value (items per STAR-PU) is benchmarked against the Quality Premium (2017/18 scheme) target of equal to or below England 2013/14 mean performance value of 1.161 items per STAR-PU.
Unit: per STAR-PU
Age: All ages
Sex: Persons
Year type: Calendar
Benchmarking method: No comparison
Benchmarking significance level: n/a
Confidence interval method: No confidence intervals available
Confidence interval details:Confidence intervals not required as population value is known.

Caveats:

STAR-PU data is in appropriate to use at any smaller level than total prescribing. I.e. individual drug class level.

STAR-PU data only includes antibiotics that are administered orally. Orally administered derivative of BNF 5.1 codes account for more than 99.8% of all prescribed items.

Missing primary care data can occur for various reasons. The provider may have merged with another provider, changed name or failed to meet the minimum number to conform with NHS Digital rules on confidentiality.

Drugs are only included in the numerator if they have a British National Formulae (BNF) 5.1 code consistent with an anti-bacterial item.

Figures will vary if compared to similar indicators at different geographical levels as they are separate and have different criteria for inclusion and exclusion.

 
Copyright: © Crown copyright

About STAR_PU:
Using STAR-PU the prescribing values are weighed not only for the population size at each CCGs but by their composition in terms of age and gender. For detailed explanation see:  
NHS, Prescribing Measures and their application, Seventh edition, March 2012
Or the 6th edition referred to in indicator definitions: 
<http://www.hscic.gov.uk/media/9348/Prescribing-measures-and-their-application-v6/pdf/Prescribing_Measures_6th_edition.pdf>
